# 剑5 Test1

## P1

### 1 Which part of your country do most people live in?

In China, most people live in Beijing because it is a very large city with numerous international technology giants.

### 2 Tell me about the main industries there.

Actually, I'm not sure about the specific industries in Beijing, but I believe there are many financial and technology companies.

### 3  How easy is it to travel around your country?

It's quite easy to travel in my country. You just need to get your passport and take an airplane to China; that's all you have to do.

### 4 Has your country changed much since you were a child?

Yes, it's true. When I was a child, Beijing doesn’t look fancy at all, but after twenty years, it has become a modern city with so many buildings.

## P2

### Describe a well-known person you like or admire.

You should say:

​	who this person is

​	what this person has done

​	why this person is well known

​	and explain why you admire this person.



Well, I would like to describe a person who is my coworker when I worked at Baidu, and he is also my mentor. I say this because he knows everything in many fields and he is really kind and helpful to us. His capability is very impressive, and he is very intelligent and insightful.

## P3

### 1 What kind of people become famous people these days?

### 2 Is this different from the kind of achievement that made people famous in the past? In what way?

### 3 How do you think people will become famous in the future?

### 4 What are the good things about being famous? Are there any disadvantages?

### 5 How does the media in your country treat famous people?

### 6 Why do you think ordinary people are interested in the lives of famous people?