# C17-T1 Writing

## Task 1

The maps clearly summarize changes taking place in a particular industrial area in the town of Norbiton during the period from now to future.

It is obvious that this industrial area had changed a lot. To be more specific, the road and river had divided the map into three sections. The river from the west corner to the east corner, the town in the west of central area and the farmland located in the northo of the map are still there without any change. However, some factories around the central area had been removed.

Turning to the left side of the map, the housing around the road and the shops in the left-hand of circle road having been established. Besides, the main road from the west to the east having been expanded with a cricle area, and the road from the bottom to the top having been extented, which end is farmland. Furthermore, the playground, shcool, medical centre and other housing having been constructed in the right section of the map in the future.

Overall, it is clear that this industrial area in the town of Norbiton having become much more crowded and modernized than before, with more living places and infrasturcture but wither small spare space and oasis.

## Task 2

In recent times, take risks has been a subject of intense debate. There are those who firmly believe that take risks in their professional lives and personal lives are benefical, while others contend that take risks may bring more uncertainty. From my persepective, I figure that the advantages of taking risks outweigh the drawbacks.

One of the primary reasons for my agreement is that take risks could bring inner stability when we face the failures. There are numerous failures acting in our daily routine without any obvious signs, which means that if you could stand for these risks, you will experience the demanding pround insights into this world and the nature of the human. For example, people who through the failure and rebirth in it, which can leverage their own initiatives to actively purse their goals, they will find the things around themselves would become easily available and the inner peace filled with this opulent world.

Another significant aspect is that take risks could strenghten the resistency of our mental world and learn more useful experiences. If a man never met a mistake in his life, he would never learnt anything. The quote we always known is that the success is birth from the failure, which means that people should take risks and learn experiences from the failure procedures. For instance, if I never experience the consistence issue of database when I coding for a certain program, I would never know the database how to work to make effort to the consistency, and next time I may encounter a bigger problem and then I need to take more seriously risks.

To sum up, after careful consideration of both sides of the argument, it is evident that the advantages of taking risks outweigh the drawbacks, which can help us to understand this world better and be known with ourselves.
