# C18-T1 Writing

全套真题按时模拟，Task 1 之前写过就没写了，Task 2 用了差不多也是 20 分钟吧，没看具体时间。不过参考了部分模板内容，中间内容是自己写的。

## Task 2

In recent times, the aim of science should be to imporve people's lives has been a subject of intense debate. There are those who firmly believe that science should be to improve people's lives, while others contend that science should be take more possibilities to pursue unknown fields. From my perspective, I completely agree with the view that the aim of science should be to improve people's lives.

One of the primary reasons for my agreement is that science itself could offer more convenient to those people who almost disable. There are numerous invalid people lived in this high-speed developed world, which have hardly spare time to do things what they really liked same with normal ones. For instance, most of normal individuals can easily available to go out anywhere they want to go, but for those invalid ones, they have some deficits which make them move inconveniently. If there is an option to help these invalid individuals move easily again, thus they can feel this world with sense of achievement.

However, even science may explore more possibilities to unknown fields which can help our world become more high-tech though, it may take long time to effort. While for improve people's lives can get results immediately. For example, cellphone manufactures could explore futuristic form of phones, but to improve the performance of phones may take more positive effects which can bring more useful improvements to users who really need these traits instead of opulent functions.

To sum up, after careful consideration of both sides of the argument, it is evident that science should be to improve the quality of our lives, which can give us positive feedbacks quickly and specifically.
